# Identity Provisioning and its Standards

User and identity provisioning plays a key role in propagating users,
user groups, and user identities across different systems and SaaS
applications. Provisioning is the process of coordinating the creation
of user accounts, e-mail authorizations in the form of rules and roles,
and other tasks such as provisioning of resources associated with
enabling new users.

This is particularly useful when adding new users into
your organization. WSO2 Identity Server can ensure that provisioning is
made easy. A provisioning request can be sent to the Identity Server to
add a new user and this user is provisioned to various applications that
are configured with the Identity Server. This process is illustrated in
the following diagram.

![User and identity provisioning using WSO2 Identity Server](../../assets/img/getting-started/identity-provisioning.png)

### Inbound and outbound provisioning

Inbound provisioning focuses on how to provision users, user groups, and
user identities to the Identity Server. This can be done using the REST
API available for SCIM. The following figure is an example of this
process.

![Inbound provisioning using WSO2 Identity Server](../../assets/img/getting-started/inbound-provisioning.png)

Outbound provisioning involves provisioning users, user groups, and user
identities to external systems or SaaS applications.

![Outbound provisioning using WSO2 Identity Server](../../assets/img/getting-started/outbound-provisioning.png)


### Introducing SPML

Service Provisioning Markup Language (SPML) is an XML-based framework
developed by OASIS for exchanging user, resource, and service
provisioning information between cooperating organizations. The Service
Provisioning Markup Language is the open standard for the integration
and interoperation of service provisioning requests.

The goal of SPML is to allow organizations to securely and quickly set
up user interfaces for Web services and applications, by letting
enterprise platforms such as Web portals, application servers, and
service centers generate provisioning requests within and across
organizations. This can lead to automation of user or system access and
entitlement rights to electronic services across diverse IT
infrastructures, so that customers are not locked into proprietary
solutions

### Introducing SCIM

The System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM) specification is
designed to make managing user identities in cloud based applications
and services, easier. User and identity provisioning is a key aspect of
any identity management solution. In simple terms, it is to create,
maintain, and delete user accounts and related identities in one or more
systems or applications in response to business processes that are
initiated either by humans directly or by automated tasks.

Today the enterprise solutions adopt products and services from multiple
cloud providers in order to accomplish various business requirements.
Hence, it is no longer sufficient to maintain user identities only in a
corporate LDAP.

In most cases, SaaS providers also need dedicated user accounts created
for the cloud service users, which raises the need of proper identity
provisioning mechanisms to be in place. Currently, different cloud
vendors expose non-standard provisioning APIs that make it a nightmare
for the enterprises to develop and maintain proprietary connectors to
integrate with multiple SaaS providers. For example, Google exposes the
Google Provisioning API for provisioning user accounts in Google Apps
Domain.

When enterprise IT systems consist of distributed, heterogeneous
components from multiple vendors, and from both in-house and cloud, it
is key to have an open standard that all agree upon in order to achieve
interoperability and simplicity while getting rid of multiple connectors
to perform the same thing.

SCIM is an emerging open standard that defines a comprehensive REST API,
along with a platform neutral schema and a SAML binding to facilitate
the user management operations across SaaS applications; placing
specific emphasis on simplicity and interoperability.

### Brief history of identity provisioning

??? note "Click here to read about the history of identity provisioning"

	   The following diagram illustrates the progressive development that has
	   taken place in the history of identity provisioning.

	   ![Provisioning evolution and history](../../assets/img/getting-started/provisioning-evolution.png)

	   The OASIS Technical Committee for Service Provisioning was formed in
	   2001 to define an XML-based framework for exchanging user, resource, and
	   service provisioning information. As a result, the SPML (Service
	   Provisioning Mark Language) came up in 2003 and was based on three
	   proprietary provisioning standards by that time. IBM and Microsoft
	   played a major role in building the SPML 1.0. The following are
	   the three proprietary provisioning standards.

       -   <a href="http://xml.coverpages.org/itml.html" target="_blank">Information Technology Markup Language(ITML)</a>
	   -   <a href="http://xml.coverpages.org/adpr.html" target="_blank">Active Digital Profile (ADPr)</a>
	   -   <a href="http://xml.coverpages.org/xrpm.html" target="_blank">eXtensible Resource Provisioning Management
    	   (XRPM))</a>

	   <a href="https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.php/3032/cs-pstc-spml-	core-1.0.pdf" target="_blank">SPML
	   1.0</a> defined a Request/Response protocol as well as couple of bindings.
	   Requests/Responses are all based on XML and each operation has it own
	   schema.

	   One of the <a href="http://xml.coverpages.org/SPML-Bindings10-OS.pdf" target="_blank">bindings</a>
	   defined in SPML 1.0 is the SOAP binding. It specifies how to transfer
	   SPML requests and responses wrapped in a SOAP message. All the SPML
	   operations supported by the provisioning entity should be declared in
	   the WSDL file itself. The other one is file binding. This binding refers
	   to using SPML elements in a file, typically for the purposes of bulk
	   processing provisioning data and provisioning schema documentation.

	   In the closing stages of SPML 1.0, IBM and Microsoft felt strongly that
	   support for complex XML objects needed to be done differently. The OASIS
	   TC voted to postpone this effort until 2.0. As a result, IBM
	   unofficially stated that they wouldn't be implementing 1.0 and would
	   wait on the conclusion of the 2.0 process.

	   IBM and Microsoft, who were part of the initial SPML specification, went
	   ahead and started building their own standard for provisioning via SOAP
	   based services. This is called WS-Provisioning. WS-Provisioning
	   describes the APIs and schemas necessary to facilitate interoperability
	   between provisioning systems in a consistent manner using Web services.
	   It includes operations for adding, modifying, deleting, and querying
	   provisioning data. It also specifies a notification interface for
	   subscribing to provisioning events. Provisioning data is described using
	   XML and other types of schema. This facilitates the translation of data
	   between different provisioning systems.

	   WS-Provisioning is part of the Service Oriented Architecture and has
	   been submitted to the Organization for the Advancement of Structured
	   Information Standards (OASIS) Provisioning Service Technical Committee.

	   OASIS PSTC took both SPML 1.0 and WS-Provisioning specification as
	   inputs and developed SPML 2.0 in 2006.

	   SPML 1.0 has been called a slightly improved Directory Services Markup
	   Language (DSML). SPML 2.0 defines an extensible protocol (through
	   capabilities) with support for a DSML profile (SPMLv2 DSMLv2), as well
	   as XML schema profiles. SPML 2.0 differentiates between the protocol and
	   the data it carries.

	   SPML 1.0 defined file bindings and SOAP bindings that assumed the
	   SPML1.0 Schema for DSML. The SPMLv2 DSMLv2 Profile provides a degree of
	   backward compatibility with SPML 1.0. The DSMLv2 profile supports a
	   schema model similar to that of SPML 1.0. The DSMLv2 Profile may be more
	   convenient for applications that mainly access targets that are LDAP or
	   X500 directory services. The XSD Profile may be more convenient for
	   applications that mainly access targets that are Web services.

	   The SPML 2.0 protocol enables better interoperability between vendors,
	   especially for the core capabilities (those found in 1.0). You can
	   “extend” SPML 1.0 using ExtendedRequest, but there is no guidance about
	   what those requests can be. SPML 2.0 defines a set of “standard
	   capabilities” that allow you to add support in well-defined ways.
	
	   SPML definitely addressed the key objective of forming the OASIS PSTC in
	   2001. It solved the interoperability issues, however, it was too complex
	   to implement. It was SOAP biased and was addressing too many concerns in
	   provisioning than what actually was needed.

	   It was around 2009 - 2010 that people started to talk about the death of
	   SPML.

	   In parallel to the criticisms against SPML - another standard known as
	   SCIM (Simple Could Identity Management) started to emerge. This was
	   around mid 2010 - and initiated by Salesforce, Ping Identity, Google and
	   others. WSO2 joined the effort sometime in early 2011 and took part in
	   all the interop events that have happened so far.

	   SCIM is purely RESTful. The initial version supported both JSON and XML.
	   SCIM introduced a REST API for provisioning and also a core schema
	   (which also can be extended) for provisioning objects. SCIM 1.1 was
	   finalized in 2012 - and then it was donated to the
	   <a href="http://tools.ietf.org/wg/scim/" target="_blank">IETF</a>
	   . Once in IETF, it changed the definition of SCIM to System for Cross-domain Identity Management and it
	   supports only JSON and now XML.

	   As a result of the increasing pressure on OASIS PSTC, they started
	   working on a REST binding for SPML, which is known as
	   <a href="https://wiki.oasis-open.org/provision/restpml" target="_blank">RESTPML</a>
	  , around 2011. This is still based on XML and not yet active so far.
