# Introduction to Transports

WSO2 Carbon is the base platform on which all WSO2 Java products are
developed. Built on OSGi, WSO2 Carbon encapsulates all major SOA
functionality. It supports a variety of transports, which make
Carbon-based products capable of receiving and sending messages over a
multitude of transport and application-level protocols. This
functionality is implemented mainly in the Carbon core, which combines a
set of transport-specific components to load, enable, manage and persist
transport related functionality and configurations.

All transports currently supported by WSO2 Carbon are directly or
indirectly based on the Apache Axis2 transports framework. This
framework provides two main interfaces for each transport
implementation.

-   org.apache.axis2.transport.TransportListener - Implementations of
    this interface should specify how incoming messages are received and
    processed before handing them over to the Axis2 engine for further
    processing.
-   org.apache.axis2.transport.TransportSender - Implementations of this
    interface should specify how a message can be sent out from the
    Axis2 engine.

Each transport implementation generally contains a transport
receiver/listener and a transport sender, since they use the interfaces
above. The Axis2 transport framework enables the user to configure,
enable and manage transport listeners and senders independent to each
other, without having to restart the server. For example, one may enable
only the JMS transport sender without having to enable JMS transport
listener.

There are two main types of transports: blocking and non-blocking. In a
blocking transport, the I/O threads get blocked since the same worker
thread that sends the request to the server will remain open to receive
the response, until messages are completely processed by the underlying
Axis2 engine . However, in non-blocking transports the worker thread
that sends the request will not wait for the response and another thread
will receive the response. Thereby, non-blocking transports increase the
performance of the server.

The transport management capability of WSO2 Carbon is provided by the
following feature in the WSO2 feature repository:

**Name** : WSO2 Carbon - Transport Management Feature  
**Identifier** : org.wso2.carbon.transport.mgt.feature.group

If transport management capability is not included in your product by
default, you can add it by installing the above feature using the
instructions given in the [Feature
Management](https://docs.wso2.com/display/Carbon420/Installing+Features+via+the+UI)
section.
